University of Hew Brunswick
               in Saint Fobn

PR6039.H76T88
Twenty years a-growing
UNIVERSITY OF NEW BRUNSWICK LIBRARIES

       3 9960 00059623 9
Please return or renew by
     latest date below
         PATTIE MeSCRIPT OF
TWENTY YEARS A-GROWING
By Dylan Thomas

COLLECTED POEMS, 1934-1952

DEATHS AND ENTRANCES

Poems

PORTRAIT    OF THE  ARTIST AS A
                           YOUNG DOG

Fictional autobiography

UNDER MILK WOOD

A play for voices

THE DOCTOR AND THE DEVILS

A film scenario

QUITE EARLY ONE MORNING

Broadcasts

A PROSPECT OF THE SEA

Stories and prose writings

LETTERS TO VERNON WATKINS

ADVENTURES IN THE SKIN TRADE

Fiction

DYLAN THOMAS: A BIBLIOGRAPHY
   By John A. Rolph

DYLAN THOMAS IN AMERICA
   By J. M. Brinnin

THE COLOUR OF SAYING
   An anthology of verse spoken by Dylan Thomas
   (Edited by Ralph Maud and Aneirin Talfan Davies)
DYLAN THOMAS

         a film script of

TWENTY YEARS
   A-GROWING

       from the story by
      Maurice O' Sullivan

          LONDON
J. M. DENT & SONS LTD
      © Dylan Thomas Estate, 1964
               All right reserved

            Made in Great Britain
                        at the

    Aldine Press - Letchworth - Herts
                         for

       J. M. DENT & SONS LTD
Aldine House - Bedford Street - London

             First published 1964
   `Here is the egg of a seabird--lovely, perfect and laid
this very morning.' So wrote E. M. Forster when Twenty
Years A-Growing by Maurice O'Sullivan was first published
in English in 1933. In his unfinished film script of the first
half of the book, Dylan Thomas has preserved this freshness.
The script has only recently come to light, and becomes a
new creation in the lovely and evocative style of its author.

*  *  *  *

   The Blasket Islands lie off the Kerry Coast in the extreme
south-west corner of Ireland. They are now uninhabited
except for occasional summer-time holiday-makers. The
district is still Irish-speaking.
              Digitized by the Internet Archive
                   in 2022 with funding from
                   Kahle/Austin Foundation

https://archive.org/details/twentyyearsgrowi0000dyla
           ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This Dylan Thomas film script is based on Twenty
Years A-Growing by Maurice O'Sullivan, published

                by Chatto & Windus Ltd.
= 5 eae                                                 ve ee        ahs
                                                              --    +

                                                        = ~--
                                                                ~~

                                                                  ae |

                                                        et aD @&

          i

jf

                                                     >
   T 1s morning in the market-town of Dingle. A cracked
J=: bell is ringing. The main street is wide awake: a

    man leans at a corner, motionless, smoking. A woman
stands at an open doorway, looking at the morning. A
large pig crosses the road slowly, and enters a cottage.
The school bell still rings.

   Then, at the top of the street, appear a countrywoman
and a little boy in a smock, hand in hand. They walk on
down the street towards us.

   And suddenly we hear a crying and shouting, and there
appear, at the top of the street and behind the woman and
the little boy, a helter-skelter of children who run down
towards us. And as they run, so other children come out
of the cottages, on either side of the street, and join them.
And they all scamper past the woman and the little boy,
making quite a noise, and past us and out of the picture.

   And as the woman and the little boy approach us now,
hand in hand, the little boy clinging, we hear the voice of
Maurice O' Sullivan the man, gently, reminiscently talking,
as a person to no audience but himself and a friend.

THE voice And that's indeed the first thing I remember
       very clearly in all my life. It was in the town of Dingle,
       County Kerry, Ireland, and I was going on my first
       day to school, holding the hand of Peg de Roiste. For
       it was she who took care of me when my mother died,
       dear God bless her soul and the souls of all the dead.
       Faith, there in my memory still I see old Peg and
       myself, Maurice O'Sullivan, walking to school.

                                                  9
    And Peg de Roiste and little Maurice O'Sullivan are
walking now towards the entrance of the whitewashed
village school. The cracked bell stops ringing. He clings
hard to her hand, and looks up at her, and she smiles down,
nodding and reassuring, as they go into the school.

    Now we are in the schoolroom: a whitewashed room with
rows of benches full of children and a little chair and table
at the end, anda blackboard. At the end of the room, behind
the table, stand two posts coming down from the roof to the
floor. Peg de Roiste and Maurice sit close together on the
back bench. He stares around the classroom, quiet as a
mouse, his eyes wide. All the other children are making a
power of noise.

    The schoolmistress enters.
   The noise is hushed.

THE CHILDREN Good morning, mistress.

   The schoolmistress sits at her table, opens a book, looks
at the children, marks down their names, silently. ...

THE voIcE I remember there was teaching us as school-
       mistress a woman who was grey as a badger, with two
      tusks of teeth hanging down over her lip, and if she
      wasn't cross, it isn't day yet. She was the devil itself,
      or so I thought.

   Close now to Peg and Maurice: we hear him whisper
timidly.

MAURICE Where are the nice sweets you said there'd be,
       Peg?

PEG Go up now, she's for giving you the sweets.
                                      10
   Maurice shakes his head and clings harder to her hand.
And Peg gets up with him and takes him by the hand to the
little table.

   From the back of the classroom now we see the backs
of Peg and Maurice and the face of the schoolmistress.

MIsTRESS  Who are you and what is your name?
MAURICE   They call me Maurice.
MistRESS  Maurice what?
MAURICE   Maurice.

   We hear Peg whisper to the mistress, who nods and

writes in her book.
   Then the mistress rises and goes to a cupboard and takes

out a big tin of sweets and puts it on the little table before

Maurice.
   We TRACK uP towards the table. Maurice timidly puts

his hand into the tin and takes out a sweet in the shape of

a horse.

MaAuRICE (with wonder) A horse.

   The mistress nods.
   He puts his hand in again and takes out another-shaped

sweet.

MAURICE (a little louder) A boat.

   She nods.
   He dips and takes out another two sweets, one in each
hand. He raises his hands to show Peg.

MAURICE (shrill with excitement)       Oh, a man. And a pig.
                                   11
MISTRESS Be a good boy now and go back to the bench.
       And come to school every day.

MAURICE I will.

   Holding his treasures, he goes to the back bench.

MISTRESS You will, surely.

   And Peg goes past him, and touches his hand, and is gone.
   And we see Maurice close, as he sits in contentment,
sucking the sweet horse, and the children in unison begin
to recite their morning lesson.

Dissolve To:

   The children in the playground, kicking a football.
Maurice among them. The football strikes him on the head,
and bounces off. The others go on playing, but Maurice,
standing alone, lifts up his head to the sky and howls, like
a child alone in the world.

Dissolve To:

   Dingle main street, at morning again, with the cracked
bell ringing.

   And down the street, scattering the chickens, come the
noisy children, Maurice among them.

Cut To:
   The classroom. Maurice is now sitting on a bench in the

middle, a little boy next to him who is Mickil Dick.
   All the children are repeating a lesson. And through their

voices and the voice of Maurice we hear:

                                                            12
THE voIcE I was going to school every day, growing older
       and bigger and none the wiser at all, I am guessing,
       and it was the gentleness and the sweets had long
        rown cold. It seemed to me there was nobody in the
       world had a worse life than myself. I did not know
       what I wanted, but I knew it was not to be kept indoors
       all day, like a baby ora girl. I wanted to be, oh, I knew
        not where...

   And we see, as the Voice speaks, that Maurice is not
joining in the speaking-aloud of the lesson but is lost in a
world of his own mazy making. Suddenly the mistress's
voice cuts across the voices of the children, and they stop.

MISTRESS'S VOICE Maurice O'Sullivan.

   He raises his eyes. We do not see the mistress, but only,
close, the benches of children.

MISTRESS'S VOICE You are dreaming again. Come here.

Maurice rises and crosses out of the picture.

MISTRESS'S VOICE Put out your hand.

   We see the intent faces of the children staring at the
invisible punishment. One child nudges another, smiling.
But most are dead quiet. We hear the sound of a stinging

slap.             to  Maurice's  empty  place on  the bench,
   itickil, next
winces and involuntarily draws back his hand.

Another stinging slap.

Mickil's face is set and white.

Another slap.

                           13
     Maurice returns; takes his place; sits stiffly, staring in
 front of him with very bright eyes.

    And the children begin to recite together again.
    Maurice moves his lips. We hear very softly, through
 the voices of the children, the voice of the child Maurice.

 MAURICE Your soul to the devil, you old hertings- 64

     Now Maurice is coming out of .a Dingle cottage--a
 cottage not in the main street we have seen before but in a
 country road. He carries his school-books hung over his
 shoulder. With him is Mickil. And once more the cracked
 school bell is ringing, but farther off than before.

    They dawdle down the road together, their school-books
swinging, slashing off the tops of the roadside ferns, idly
kicking the stones.

MAURICE I don't know why in the world we are going to
       school, on a day like this, Mickil.

MICKIL We could be having the day under the hedge...
MAURICE We could be playing the devil up on the Hill of

       the Cairn, or making shapes out of sticks . . .
MICKIL Or snatching the bags of sugar out of the hands of

       the old men in the poor-house . .
MAURICE Or dabbling in the boghole, by God: . ..Oh;

       when will I be a grown man, Mickil, with a pony and
       cart and a clay pipe maybe. . . . Whisht! Who's that
       there?

   Up the road towards them come two women and a man.
They wave at Maurice and Mickil and walk on straight
towards them. Maurice turns and runs in the other direc-
tion, and hides in the hedge.

   From the hedge we see what he sees: the man and the

                              14
women talking to Mickil and pointing up, smiling, towards
the hedge. One of the women puts an orange in Mickil's
hand, and the other woman gropes in her bag for a present.
And, still from the hedge, we see Maurice run back towards
them, stopping shyly a yard away.

woman'   Why did you run away just now?

MAURICE  (bashfully) Nothing... .

woman    Do you know who I am?
MAURICE   I do not.

WOMAN    [am your aunt, my treasure.

   She takes Maurice up in her arms and kisses him, then
puts him down again but holds him close to her.

   And the other woman kisses him also.

woman That is another aunt, too, and this is your uncle.

MAN (An elaborate greeting in Irish.)

The school bell stops ringing.

 MAURICE What sort of talk has that man?

 WOMAN That's Irish.
 MAURICE What's Irish?
"woman Oh, wait now till you go home, that is the time

        you will have the Irish.
 mMAuRICE Where is my home? We have no Irish at all in

        this home here.
 woman This is not your home, Maurice. Your home is in

        the Blasket.

   Maurice looks, without understanding, at the faces of his
aunts and his uncle.

                                              15
MANS ca aaears (a speech in Irish).

And the speech is softened so that, through it, we hear:

THE VOICE (softly) But I was as blind to what he was saying

       about the Blasket as the herring leaping in the Bay of
       Dingle Mess

MAURICE (to the woman, who still holds him close)  What
      is the Blasket?

WOMAN It is an island.

MAURICE Is it a long way away? Over the sea?

WOMAN It is ten miles from Dingle .

MICKIL Ten miles, God be with us...

FIRST WOMAN Oh, hear him. You were born on the Blasket,
      Maurice, asthore, and because you were only half a
      year old when your mother died. . .

SECOND WOMAN Dear God bless her soul and the souls
       of all the dead...

FIRST WOMAN... your father sent you to Dingle to be
       cared for by Peg de Roiste. Has she never been telling
       you that? ...

woman And your father is for coming out before long to
      take you home at last. Would you like that, Maurice?

MAURICE Who is my father?

WOMAN Isn't it often your father was talking  to you? You
       should have known him long ago         is, for many

MAURICE I don't know which of the men he
      come...

woman  Oh musha, youth is a queer thing. >...

                                     16
    And the women give Maurice and Mickil sweets, apples
and oranges.

    And the man comes up to them both, and, talking Irish,
solemnly shakes their hands. As he talks, Maurice and
Mickil look at one another in wonder. Then he takes
money from his pocket and gives Maurice a half acrown and
Mickil a shilling...

    And the two aunts kiss Maurice again.

FIRST WOMAN Now we go to see Peg de Roiste. Farewell,
      and a blessing (in Irish).

SECOND WOMAN Farewell, and a blessing (in Irish).
MAN Farewell, and a blessing (in Irish).

And they go up the road.

CLOSE-UP of Maurice and Mickil. Mickil outs his shilling for
Maurice to see.

MICKIL [| never saw a penny as bright as that. . . . Where
       is yours?

MAURICE Look, mine is bigger.

MICKIL I don't know what we had better buy with them...
MAURICE Marbles and boats and. . . Oh, Mickil, the bell

      has stopped!

And they race down the road.

The classroom.

The mistress is chalking on the blackboard, her back to

the children.

The door creaks open and Maurice and Mickil creep in to

their places on the bench.

They look up fearfully at the blackboard and the mistress,

who has not turned round.

B                           17
   Under the words of the lesson chalked on the blackboard,
she writes:

                 MAURICE AND MICKIL ARE AN HOUR LATE.

   The two boys look at each other furtively.
    The mistress writes:

                    MAURICE AND MICKIL STAND UP.
   The mistress turns from the board. The two boys stand.

MISTRESS And what kept you so late?

   Now, from the angle of the mistress, we see the benches,
the seated children, and Maurice and Mickil standing.
Mickil is pouting, getting ready to cry; he makes a little,
whimpering noise.

MISTRESS'S VOICE Have done with your snivelling and

        answer my question.

MAURICE We weren't here in any place but when we were
       coming to school we met some kinsfolk of mine and
       they kept us talking.

MISTRESS Isn't it a fine excuse you make up! Go out now
      and cut a good fat rod and bring it in to me, my good
       boy, the way I won't hear any more of your blather.

   Maurice goes out of the classroom.
   We see him now walking across to a hedge outside the
school, opening his penknife.
   He seizes a stout branch, looks at it, lets it spring back.
He seizes another. Still too stout. He cuts offa thin branch,
canes his own hand lightly, gently with it.
   cuT To the same cane coming down hard on his out-
stretched hand.

                                               18
    TRACKBACK to see Maurice and Mickil before the mis-
tress's table.

    It is now Mickil's turn. Three blows. Maurice has his
hands behind his back.

    The mistress scolds them to the two posts at the end of
the classroom and ties them up and goes back to her black-
board. She wipes out the words about Maurice and Mickil
and continues to chalk up the lesson.

Dissolve:
    Now the blackboard is entirely covered with the words

and figures of the lesson.
    Maurice and Mickil are still tied to the posts.
    There is a knock at the door. The mistress turns around

quickly, looks at the door and then looks at the two boys.
    Another, sharper knock.
    She hurries to the door and opens it.
    The parish priest comes in.

Cut To:
   CLosE sHOT of the two boys, who whisper delightedly

to each other.

MAURICE It is with us now, my boy.

MICKIL You will see some sport.

MAURICE It is now we have the bright smiles.

   From the end of the classroom near the posts we see the
priest talking to the mistress.

mickIL_ The devil take you, do you see the look on the
       Wsstress:7. 2).

                                           19
   The priest, at the top of the classroom, is looking around
him.

PRIEST I see all of the children but Maurice and Mickil

       now ... where are they in the world?

MAURICE  Here we are, Father.

MICKIL

   The priest comes over from the top of the classroom
towards us and towards the two boys.

priest Oh, what is the meaning of this? Who tied you
      here? ©

MAURICE The mistress, Father.

priest And why?

MAURICE I will tell you, Father. When Mickil and I were
       coming to school we met some kinsfolk of mine and
       they kept us talking, the way we were an hour late.

   As the priest beckons the mistress over, Maurice winks
at Mickil.

PRIEST What is this you are after doing to the poor little
       children?

MISTRESS Oh, father, I beg your pardon, I was for putting
       a little fear into them. .

   Maurice shows his hands to the Father.

MAURICE Look, Father. .
PRIEST Oh, my shame.

   He turns to the mistress.

PRIEST I will make short delay of putting you out of the
      school if you go on with this work. Untie them at
                                          20
       once, and if I find that you set hands on them again
       you will have news to tell...

    After the first few words (and as the mistress unties the
boys) the priest's speech is softened into the background
so that we hear: ©

THE VoIcE (softly) This was the first time I ever saw anger
       on a priest, and IJ said to myself that it comes on them
       as any other man...

Cut -To:
    LONG sHoT of Maurice and Mickil running up the hill

of the Cairn, past the black bog, into the dusk. And as they
run, calling to each other in the still evening, we hear:

THE voice And the end of it was we had the rest of the
       day off, and we played, I remember, on the Hill of the
       Cairn till the dark came...

   We follow the boys up the hill, and as the dusk grows
deeper we hear:

THE VOICE Was it that night, I wonder, that I dreamed a
       dream I have never forgotten? That night or another,
       who cares, for the tale of a man's life is beyond the
      bother of the clock and he must try to remember it
      the best he may...

   And Maurice and Mickil have vanished into the darkness,
and now there is nothing but darkness, and now again the
darkness lifts and we are in a cottage room lit only by fire-
light. We move down the room, past dresser and table and
chairs, and come to a bed where Maurice and Mickil lie
together awake but silent. The voice is talking throughout.

                                                         21
THE VOICE I only know it was a winter's night, very wild,
       with the patter of snow on the window panes, and
       myself stretched out on the flat of my back in the fine
       cosy bed, and ever thinking of the Blasket.

   We come closer and closer to Maurice and Mickil, and
their eyes close and they fall asleep, the firelight moving
their faces.

THE voice But falling asleep, I was dreaming all of a
       sudden not of the Blasket at all but that Mickil Dick
       and I were walking through a fine green meadow,
       gathering flowers. When we had gathered our fill of
       them, we sat down, talking of school and brilla-
       bralla, as is the habit of children.
           After a while it seemed that Mickil fell asleep--
       and I asleep that was dreaming it all. While I sat
       thinking what a strange thing was that same sleep,
       what would I see come out of his mouth but a pretty
       butterfly.

   Through this we see a LONG sHOT of Maurice and Mickil
walking in a meadow, picking flowers. Half of the great
meadow is in sunlight, half in deep dusk through which we
see the strange shapes of trees moving and strange hills.

   Closer now, we see the children sit down by a stream,
their arms full of flowers. They sit in the sunlight. We hear
birds singing above them, but, from a distance, we hear,
too, the note of the owl as though it came from the dark
half of the great meadow.

   And closer still we see a butterfly fly above Mickil
sleeping.

   We see the butterfly fly away down the meadow.
   Still it is flying.

                                                              22
    Maurice is running along the sunlit meadow.
    Still the butterfly is flying.
    Maurice is running along the sunlit meadow towards the
dusk. And as he runs, so the sunlight behind him grows
suddenly dusky and the dusk before him lightens.
    Still the butterfly is flying.
    It flies on to a gate.
    Birds are singing.
    Beyond the gate with the butterfly perched upon it is a
sunlit meadow.
    Maurice is running towards the gate and the butterfly.
And behind him is deep dusk, and the note of the owl.
    He reaches the gate and the butterfly flies away, into the
sunlit meadow.
    And Maurice climbs the gate. And climbing the gate,
he is suddenly in deep shadow.
    With a spring he is over. Over into the sunlight.
    Still the butterfly is flying.
    In the meadow lies a horse's skull.
    Maurice kneels by the skull.
    The butterfly flies through the eyes of the skull.
   The sunlit field is darkening, dusking.
    The butterfly flies out of the mouth of the skull.
    The butterfly is flying.
    Maurice rises and runs through dusk towards the gate
which stands at the entrance to a sunlit meadow.

   The butterfly is flying.
   Maurice climbs the gate, in deep shadow.
   With a spring, he is in sunlight.
   He runs along the sunlit meadow.
   Mickil is lying asleep. The butterfly flies over his face,

and is gone.
   Maurice sits by his side, looking into Mickil's face.

                                        23
   Mickil wakes, yawns, stretches.
   And we hear the voice of Maurice the child saying, as he
sits by waking Mickil in the sunny meadow, by the stream:

MAURICE It seems, when a man dreams, a white butterfly
       do be coming out of his mouth. . .

   The meadow is sunlit no longer, but in deep dusk. The
deep dusk deepens into darkness.

   Then it is light again, morning light, and we are in the
cottage room again, by the bedside of the two boys. Mickil
is awake, sitting up, looking at Maurice, who is still speaking:

MAURICE... and walking away; and when it comes again
      it is then he wakes.

   And Mickil burst into a shout of laughter. And Maurice
awakes.

MICKIL Och, listen to the way he is talking in his sleep...

   And he bursts into laughter again...

   CLOSE-UP of the two boys.

Dissolve :                          the classroom, sitting
                                    reciting his lesson.
   To cLosr-up of the two boys in
on the bench...

   We hear in the background a boy

MICKIL (whispering) Anda butterfly was after coming out
      of my mouth. Faith, it was my tongue!--like this...

Mickil puts out his tongue.

MAURICE 24 Put in your tongue or the pooka will bite it off.
MICKIL It is all tales and hobgoblins with you, my boy. . .

The sound of the boy reciting in the background stops.

MAURICE I had another dream. I dreamed there were fine
       ships puffing up Dingle Market...

The mistress's voice cuts across Maurice's whisper.

MISTRESS'S VOICE Maurice!

MICKIL (in a whisper)  It is all over with us now. We are
       dead men.

MISTRESS'S VOICE Come here.

   Now we see Maurice go up to the mistress's table. He is
holding out his right hand, gingerly, in front of him, pre-
pared for the worst.

   A ragged boy, twisting his cap in his hands, stands by the
table.

MISTRESS (sourly) It is you are the fine gentleman now.
       A message has come that there is someone outside to
       speak to you...

MAURICE It is my father, by God.

And Maurice runs out of the classroom.

Cut:

   At the entrance to the school stand Maurice's two aunts,
his uncle and another man with a parcel under his arm.

   Maurice runs out excitedly, but stops when he sees them
all and will come no closer.

   The mistress has followed Maurice and is standing on the
threshold. He stares at his uncle, then at the other man.

MAURICE  Is this my father?

                                       26
FIRST AUNT This is your father, Maurice.

   And Maurice walks slowly up to his father, and his father
embraces him.

FATHER Would you like to go home with me today?

MAURICE I would indeed, what sort of place is it?

FATHER Oh, a fine place.

MAURICE Will we be going now?

FATHER As soon as you have dressed in this nice suit of
       clothes here, we will be going in the name of God.

MAURICE Will there be trousers?

FATHER `Trousers, indeed, and a jacket, and a shirt, and a
       collar and a cap and...

MAURICE We will be going, surely. . . . I will go in now
      so, and say goodbye to Mickil.

   He walks into the school: quietly, a little stiffly and

self-consciously: a small dignified boy in a child's smock.

   In the classroom he stretches out his hand to Mickil.
They stand for a few seconds, without speaking. We see
them close. Then:

MAURICE (in a     formal way, as befits a small boy about to
      become a
      Goodbye,    man, but gently still, and with affection)
      today and   Mickil, I am going home to the Blasket
      happiness.  I hope I shall see you again in health and

But Mickil is still a child, and his eyes are full of tears.

MICKIL  Oh, so do I, so do I, Maurice...

                                        26
   CUT BACK to the entrance to the school. The mistress,
on the top step, is talking down to the father.

misTREss Indeed you should know what you are doing,
       taking the child home when he is just learning his
       scholarship, and if you left him here he would have a
       livelihood for ever .

FATHER Och, my pity on your head, he's a boy from the
       Blasket Isles.

MisTREss And so he will lose his English and so he will be
       a fool when he grows up. Where and how will he get
       a job without the English?

FATHER Isn't it better still for him to have the two
       languages? And another thing, you don't know yet
       what way Ireland will turn out. Faith, a boy should
       grow up at home, and his home is in the Isles.

MIsTREss (suddenly softens) The poor little child...

Dissolve:
   The road outside the school. The aunts and the uncle and

the mistress are standing by a horse and cart. Along up the
street towards them comes Maurice in his new breeches,
jacket, shirt, collar, cap, shoes and black stockings,
whistling a tune and taking steps as long as his father's.

   The aunts and uncle greet him with delight, the women
fussing around him.

FIRST AUNT Faith, you are a grown man, God bless you.
SECOND AUNT Turn round till I see the back now.
Las [a Gat he Eee ee (admiration in Irish).
FIRST AUNT They fit you as well as if the tailor had made

       them.
                                           27
MAURICE Oh, Father, I am a great sport for fineness.

   And the two aunts kiss and fondle him, with little in-
articulate murmurs, and make him show off his fine suit
again and press money into his hand. And as he sulkily
takes their kisses, in the embarrassed dignity of his new
manhood, we hear:

THE voIcE (softly) Oh, don't I remember it now. I

       thought they were after tearing me asunder with their
       kisses, for women are the very devil for cuddling and
       coddling and all the like. Why wouldn't they take it
       fine and soft like a man?

   The mistress, unsmiling, suddenly thrusts a coin in
Maurice's hand. Then the father climbs into the cart, and
the uncle after him, and Maurice after him. The aunts
cling on to the sides of the cart. And now we see that the
heads of the children of the school are peering round the
door, Mickil's among them.

   Maurice waves to the children on the steps, waves to his
aunts.

   And the cart starts off, rattling over the cobbles.

   As it goes off we see the mistress hurrying towards the
school, shooing the children with her hands.

   The heads disappear.

   Now we see, in LONG sHoT, the cart trotting along
towards Slea Head.

   Now, in LONG sHOT, it is moving towards the cliff head.
   Now, close, it is stopping right on the wild cliff head
in the noise of wind and sea, and Maurice is standing up in
the cart staring down on the white crests of the sea.

MAURICE  Where? Where?

                                         28
   And the father points to the north-west, to the Blasket
Islands.

THE FATHER `There to the north-west. Over there.

   And, from the cart stopped at the high, windy edge, we
see the island, and hear:

THE voice I could not speak, a lump came in my throat.
       I saw little white houses huddled together in the middle
       of the island, a great wild hill straight to the west with
       no more houses to be seen, only a tower on the peak
       of the hill and the hillside white: with sheep. I did not
      like the look of it.

MAURICE But how will the horse and cart get over there?

THE FATHER We will go ina curragh,

They all climb down from the cart.
A little way away from them.

MAURICE' But what sort of thing is a curragh?

   They stand now on the cliff edge, looking out to the
island: Maurice small and still between the two tall men.

   And suddenly the head of a man appears over the cliff
edge, then his shoulders, then his body, then he is all there,
standing on the very edge, the wind blowing his hair and
his clothes. There is no sign of a path for him to have
climbed. He appears just like that: a man, suddenly comes
up over the cliff.

mMauRIcE    Oh, look, look, the man has come up out of the
      sea.
                                        29
The man walks towards them. There is a post-bag on his
back.

MAURICE Oh, who is that, Father? Did he fly up like a
       bird?

THE FATHER Faith, he is the King of the Island. . .

MAURICE (in wonder) Do all kings come up like that?

   And the King--a `fine, courteous, mannerly, well-
favoured man'--approaches the two men and the boy. And
he greets the boy first.

THE KING (in Irish) Musha, how are you now?
MAURICE (in English) Thank you very much.
THE KING The devil, I think you have no understanding

       of theilrish 2.

MAURICE I have not.

THE KING You will. And how does it please you to be
       going to the island?

MAURICE It does not look too nice altogether Py

THE KING It does not neither, just a rock torn off the land

       and sitting down in the sea. But there is no place like
       it in the world. Come down now.

   And the King takes Maurice's hand and they walk to the
very place on the edge of the cliff where the King had
appeared, and the uncle waves his hand and gets into the
cart and drives off, and the father follows Maurice and the
King.

   ae and the King stand on the cliff edge, the wind
tumbling their hair and gusting about them.

   Maurice looks down at the sea.

                                                             30
 MAURICE Do we jump?

    But the King walks over the cliff, Maurice clutching his
hand. And they disappear.

    From the cliff edge we look down at the King, Maurice
and the father walking down a'steep path to the quay and
the many curraghs that are laid there.

    And close we see Maurice pointing to the curraghs, and
we hear:

THE VOICE (softly) Oh, do not I remember it now. There

        on the quay were twenty black beetles twice as big
        a5" COW: .4.

    And we hear Maurice's voice, following quickly on these
words,

MAURICE Do the big beetles bite?

    And the two men and the boy walk on down again the
steep path, and the King is shouting with laughter. And an
echo takes up his laughter.

   And as the laughter echoes on, we PAN uP the high cliff.
Near the top of the cliff perches a big black bird. And as
the echo dies, we hear through the crashing of the sea
waves:

MAURICE'S VOICE Look at the big bird! Oh, Lord, how
       do you keep your senses up there at all!

   Now the father, the King and Maurice are walking along
the quay, the sea noise greater. And we see a curragh being
carried from the slip, but we cannot see the man who carries
it and it looks, indeed, as though the curragh is walking by
itself.

                                      31
MAURICE Qh, the beetle!
THE FATHER Faith, that's a curragh.

MAURICE Do we go in that strange thing to the island?
THE FATHER We do.

   And Maurice is shaking his head, as one who would say:
`Lord help us.'

    And now the curragh is afloat, and the King, the father
and a fisherman are in it. From the quay we see the curragh
mounting the waves and hear:

THE voice' And in the black beetle with my father and the
       King we journeyed to the island. This was the beginning
       and Dingle and the school had vanished entirely.

   Now in Lone sHot, the curragh is in mid bay, and we
hear all the time the voice speaking:

THE VOICE The wind had dropped. There was not a breath
      in the sky, a dead calm now on the water, a wisp of
       smoke rising up straight from every chimney on the
       island, the sun as yellow as gold shining over the Pass
       of the Hill slopes from the west. The beauty of the
       place filled my heart with delight.

   And now, from the island, we see the curragh come in,
and hear the voices of people and the barking of dogs; all
echoing.

   The curragh draws alongside the slip. Maurice, the King
and the father get out. And from behind them on the slip
we see people coming down by every path and children
running, and dogs barking about their feet, all coming down
towards Maurice. And we hear:

                                                          32
THE voice Oh, the island that day said Welcome, and
       Welcome.

   And behind the voice we hear, softly, the echoing sound
of Welcome, Welcome, in Irish, called by many voices.

   The crowd closes round the King, the father and Maurice,
but it is the children who come most close to Maurice and
they stare at him without speaking.

   Now an old man, the grandfather, comes out of the
crowd and walks towards Maurice, and the close circle of
children is broken, and the grandfather embraces Maurice.

THE GRANDFATHER Musha, God bless your life, my heart
       and my blood.

MAURICE Who are you?

THE GRANDFATHER Och, isn't it a strange thing that you
       would not know your own grandfather. You shall
       call me Daddo. Come up with me now...

   The grandfather takes Maurice by the hand and together
they climb up the path from the quay. The children follow
them, dancing and calling. From the top of the path we see
them climbing towards us, First one woman, then another,
darts out of the crowd and kisses him, and we hear:

THE VOICE Oh, the kisses they gave me then, the women
      of the island, I might have been a soldier returning
      from the holy wars but I would rather the frost than
      that to be done to me.

   Now the grandfather and Maurice are walking past the
village houses: long, low, narrow houses, many of them
dug into the steep slope of the hill for shelter from the

c  33
wind. And old women hurry out of the houses and take
Maurice in their arms and they murmur:

ONE OLD  WOMAN Maurisheen, asthore.          coming...
ANOTHER  OLD WOMAN Oh, my joy.
ANOTHER  OLD WOMAN Welcome as summer

   And they all kiss him, and behind him are always the
island children, staring at a wonder.

   And as the last woman kisses him, we hear:

THE voice A nasty habit in women, I thought, but I held

        my tongue,

   Now the grandfather and Maurice come to the O'Sulli-
vans' house.

   Two boys and two girls come out and stand, silent, at the

door.
   The grandfather stops.

THE GRANDFATHER Eileen, Maura, Shaun, Pierce. . .

And the four children step towards Maurice.

THE GRANDFATHER Here is your brother, Maurice. . .

   And the children move nearer Maurice, smiling;Brigid's
arms are held open.

Dissolve :

   To the interior of the O'Sullivans' house, evening. The
walls are bright with lime, a fine flowing fire sending warmth
into every corner, a dog lying in the cinders, sugan chairs
pushed back against the walls. There is a spinning-wheel in
a corner.

                                          34
    A young man is squatting near the hearth, playing a
 melodeon .

    Boys and girls are dancing; Maura the sister is dancing
 alone among them.

    The father and the grandfather sit at a table at the end
 of the room; there is a bottle on the table; all around them
 is the smoke of their pipes, and we see them through smoke ;
 cloudy, immemorial peasant figures.

    And the dancing goes on.
    Then the boys and girls sit down on the floor, and clap
their hands.
    And shyly the sister Eileen steps out of the smoky darkness
near the end table, and sings.
    At the end of a verse, we hear, from the cloudy table,
the voice of the grandfather crying:

GRANDFATHER My love for ever, Eileen.

    And as she sings, so children dance, we move again, and
we move slowly, around the room, to sad-and-gay music,
round the firelit hearth, the player, and the corner seat
where Maurice, alone, half dreaming, half awake, watches
and listens, and the table of smokers and drinkers, and
Eileen's voice fades.

   And then, out of that smoky end of the room, comes the
voice of the grandfather singing `Eamonn Magaine'.

   And moving away again, towards Maurice in his corner,
we hear:

THE voice I would feel a shiver of delight in my blood as
       I sat listening that first evening of my homecoming, and
      it was no wonder, with the sweetness of the song and
      the tremor of the voices. I did not understand the

                                        35
      meaning of the words, but the voice and the tremor

        and the sweetness were clear to me.

   Very slowly the room is growing darker, but the music
goes on. And Maurice's head is nodding.

THE VOICE .. .no wonder with the sweetness and the
       singing and the noise of the sea and the darkness and
       the sweetness and the singing and the darkness...

   And the voice fades slowly on the last words, and Maurice
is asleep in his chair in the darkening corner, and with the
singing and the music of the melodeon mingles the surging
of the sea.

   And, as the picture FADES OUT, we hear only the surging
of the sea.

Fade In:
   To the sea breaking on the island cliffs.
   Now a seagull is flying over the sea.
   We follow the flight of a seagull over the sea towards the

island.
   We follow the flight of a seagull through the sky above

the island.
   We pan Down the sky, from the flying seagull, to see,

in LONG SHOT, a man, a boy and an ass moving away towards
Hill Head .....

    Closer now we see that the man and the boy are the
grandfather and Maurice. And we hear Maurice's voice, and
the grandfather's voice closely, clearly, as though they were
near us, though they are still in LONG sHoT.

MAURICE Oh, it is a grand day to be on the island, Daddo.

THE GRANDFATHER There is no place like it...

                                                   36
    And now the CAMERA moves around the island. We see
the Great Skellig and Skellig Michael, and Iveragh to the
south-east, and herring-gulls around the trawlers in the bay.
And over the sea sounds we hear the singing of larks.

MAURICE Shall I be living here always and always, going
       after a load of turf with the old ass in the morning,
       or up at the sparrow's chirp to go lobster fishing with
       my father, or gathering the birds' eggs, or dragging the
       sea for herrings, or after the seals and the rabbits . . . ?

THE GRANDFATHER Och, the day will come...

    And as the grandfather speaks, we cut To him and
Maurice, close, standing on Hill Head.

MAURICE What day, Daddo?

    We see them now from a low level so that they are great
simple figures against the moving clouds.

THE GRANDFATHER Let it be gone from your head now.
       It's a fine, grand day today, praise to God on high!
                   There was music of birds flying over
                   the green grass
                  and little fish in hundreds
                  frolicking in the nets. . .

MAURICE Is that from a song?
THE GRANDFATHER It is indeed, from an old song. Come

      now, boy. . . . Come.

    He turns AWay 5-7.
   CUT TO the grandfather and Maurice loading turf on to
the ass.

                                                     Sy.
MAURICE Were you ever away from the Blasket, Daddo?

THE GRANDFATHER My sorrow, I spent a great part of my

      life going out to the islands all around, and it is little
      shoe or stocking was worn in those days, not even a
      drop of tea to be had, nor any thought of it.

MAURICE No tea at all!

GRANDFATHER There was no flour to be bought, no tea
      or sugar. Upon my word, it wasn't bad for that time.
      We had our food and our own clothes--the gathering
      of the strand, the hunt of the hill, the fish of the sea
      and the wool of the sheep. The devil a bit was there to
      buy some tobacco, and you could get a bundle of that
       for threepence. <2:
          Many was the day we would leave the house at sunrise
      and we would not come home again until the blackness
      and the blindness of the night, myself and Stephen
       O'Donlevy ...
          And Pad Mor and Shaun O'Carna, dear God bless
      their souls, for they are all on the way of truth of
      now...

   Close, we see him straighten up from the loading of the
turf, and look out at the sea. There are tears in his eyes.

THE GRANDFATHER _ Did ye never hear how the life of man
      is divided? Twenty years a-growing, twenty years in
      blossom, twenty years a-stooping, and twenty years
      declining.

MAURICE I never heard that before.

   The grandfather smiles.

                                                    38
 THE GRANDFATHER Indeed, it is many things you have never
       heard before. Go on with you now. .. . Be happy when
       you can...

    And now we see, in LONG sHoT, the grandfather, Maurice
 and the ass on the path towards the village. Maurice is
 running, scampering and dancing on all sides of the slow
 patiently moving old man and loaded ass.

    Now Maurice is running along the strand of white sand
 towards the harbour. We hear, loud, the noise of the waves;
and the barking of dogs we do not see, hollow, as though in
caves; and the cries of the gulls.

    Now with another boy, Tomas Owen Vaun, he is striding
along the hill path towards Horse Sound, two dogs with
them. The dogs run off into the deep grass and ferns and
begin to bark: the high eager bark of the hunter. The boys
run after them.

    Now Maurice and Tomas are striding on towards the
Scornach; they both have rabbits slung over their backs.
And we hear:

THE VOICE Inaman's life there are twenty years a-growing.
       And here on the island, for me, they were growing
       slow to the din of the sea and the singing of ten
       thousand birds as I was up in the morning with Tomas
       and the dogs hunting the rabbits in the ferns after the
       shippens, the fat little puffins, and the seagulls' eggs
       on Scornach cliffs.

   And, while the voice speaks, we see Maurice and Tomas
reaching the top of the Scornach. We look down, from
their eyes, at the great cliff sickening to the sea. They put
their rabbits in a hole, and Tomas begins to climb down the

                                            39
cliff, light as a goat through the screes. Maurice climbs,
slowly and fearfully, after him: a long way after him.

   And we look down from the clifftop and see Tomas far
below us, and Maurice clinging on not so far below, staring
up at us, the blue sea below him and all around him
the great noise of birds. We hear, through wind, sea and
birdery, the blown voice of Maurice crying.

MAURICE     Oh, holy Father, isn't it a dangerous place I am
       in?

   He moves cautiously, along a cliff ridge.  Great   numbers
of birds fly all around him.                  little  figure of

   Now, from below, we look up at the
Maurice on the cliff face, and hear:

THE voice Oh, kittiwakes, herring-gulls, puffins, guille-
      mots, sea-ravens, razorbills, black-backed gulls and
       petrels, you frighten the life out of a sinner with your
       crying and flying. cee

   And now, closer to Maurice, we see him groping in a
burrow between the rocks, groping and digging and scratch-
ing. Suddenly he pulls out his hand. There is a baby puffin
in it. And, holding the puffin out, he turns, perilously, and
calls down the cliff:

MAURICE Tomas...

And the echo answers:

ECHO Tomas.

   And another echo, and another, and another; each
farther off.

                                      40
    He moves about the face of the cliff, thrusting his hand
 into the hidden nests of the puffins.

    Now on the cliff edge, we see Maurice climbing up, and
 over his shoulder is hanging a rope on which many puffins
 are tied together.

    He reaches the clifftop, and flops down there, his puffins
 at his side.

    Then he whistles down the cliff. And the echoes take ©
 the whistle and multiply it and throw it about in the wind
 and lose it.

    And, after the echoes, comes:

 TOMAS'S VOICE I'm COMMING: ces 5

    And soon he has climbed up to the clifftop, dirty and
smiling. He has made a sack of his jersey, and hung it,
heavy, over his back.

MAURICE What have you got?
Tomas Ihave guillemots' eggs, razorbills' eggs and seagulls'

       eggs, my boy. . . why didn't you come down with me?
MAURICE (slyly) Och, I was frightened. I got nothing at all.

    And he rises and lifts up his bundle.

Tomas What have you there?

MAURICE (in a casual voice) Oh, puffins. Just puffins.
       Just thirty-six puffins, that's all... .

   And his casualness drops away from him, and he begins
to dance, whirling his rope of birds. Now we see only the
roped birds whirling.

   Now we see only a skein of birds whirling through the
sky.

                                     4I
Tomas Upon my word, you're a great hunter.

CUT BACK to Maurice.

MAURICE I'm the happiest hunter on the hills of Kerry.

Now his birds are still.

TOMAS Come to see if my eggs are clean now... .

   And he moves away, Maurice following him after he
takes up the rabbits from the hole where they were left.

MAURICE Can't you see they're clean, you little blind man.

Tomas stops at a big pool in a bog hole.

tomas Look now, if this egg is hatching it will float on
      the water, but if it is clean it will sink.

He throws in an egg.
cuT To the pool, the egg floating on it.

TOMAS's voIcE    Och, the devil take it, there is a chick in
      that one.

Another egg lands on the water, and floats.

TOMAS'S VOICE It is a good beginning.

   Another egg lands, and floats. And another, and another.
   Now the surface of the pool is covered with red-and-
black-spotted eggs floating.

TOMAS'S VOICE'. The devil a clean one among them.

   Now Maurice takes his rope of puffins and cuts it in half,
and hands over half the puffins.

MAURICE  Look at us now! Half apiece .
                                 42
     Tomas begins to laugh as he takes his share.

 ToMas_ Look at us now, indeed.

 MAURICE I don't know why in the world you are laughing
        atmeé- 2°)

Tomas Because anybody would think you were an ape,
       you are so dirty...

 MAURICE Faith, if I am dirty as you are, the yellow devil

        is on me.

    Tomas, still laughing, begins to strip off his clothes; and
Maurice likewise.

    We see them dive, naked, in the pool.
    Now they are lying, half dressed, on the grass.
    Tomas takes out a pipe and tobacco, and lights the pipe
and puffs it and passes it, silent, over to Maurice.
    And Maurice takes it and puffs it and hands it back.
    He lies flat on his back staring up at the sky.
    There is music through bird and wind and sea noise.
    Looking up, from Maurice's eyes, at the sunset sky, we
see gulls lazily wheeling.
   We hear Tomas's voice singing softly . . .
   Now the sky becomes blurred, and blurred birds seem
to lurch across it.

MAURICE'S vorcE I'm thinking the tobacco is strong,
       Tomas, or a most queer storm is a-coming up. . .

   cuT TO Maurice and Tomas, Maurice now smoking.
Slowly he hands over the pipe to Tomas and rises to his feet.

   Now the two boys are walking back towards the village,
their dogs quiet at their heels, through the sea-sounding
sunsetting evening. Maurice is a little unsteady on his feet.

                                          43
   Now we see the reflection, in water, of the houses of the
village, trembling with little spots of light.

   Now we see the village itself, Maurice and Tomas
walking through it.

   It is night nearly. Lamps are lit in every house.
   An old man stands at his doorway.

Tomas Are you well tonight, Puncan?
OLD MAN. Oh, musha, I was never so bad as I am today.

   The boys pass on, laughing.

Tomas Isn't he always bad? Good night, Maurice.

    (N.B. Insert two more greetings with two villagers whom
we will be seeing later.)

   Tomas goes in at a cottage door.

MAURICE Good night, Tomas.

   Maurice walks on, one dog at his heels, and reaches his

cottage.

   The grandfather stands outside.
   And Maurice stands by him. He looks up at the climbing
moon.

MAURICE What a night it is, Daddo...
THE GRANDFATHER And a fine gold moon over Cnoc-a-

       comma. Come in now before the potatoes get cold.

    And he goes in.
    And the moon climbs.

Fade Out:

                             44
 Fade In:
     To the calm sea in the full light of morning.
     Over the sea a bird is flying.
    The bird is flying towards the island.
     The bird is flying above the harbour.
    PANNING DOWN, we see that the quayside is crowded

 with people and that more are flocking down towards it
 on every path from the village.

    We see, from the quay, a curragh coming in.
    Now down a path run Maurice and some boys, and we
 hear:

 THE VOICE It is the custom of the island for everyone to be
        on the quay when the King is coming with the post-
        bag from Dunquin...

    Maurice joins the crowd. He sees Tomas in a group of
children.

MAURICE (calling) Tomas...

    Tomas runs over to Maurice, and a little girl, Mauraid,
with him.

THE VOICE (continuing, even through Maurice's cry)
          . . with news from the mainland and stories from the

       length and breadth of Ireland and the rumours that do
       go about of what is happening in the wide world
       beyond...

   Now the King is standing on the quay, people all around
him, making a deal of noise, chattering, arguing, questioning,

   Now we see him, as he talks, from where Maurice and
Tomas stand, the little girl Mauraid shy by their side.

                                          45
THE KING (loudly) Any man who has any spirit, let him

       take a curragh south to Ventry next Sunday. There is
       going to be a great race in it.

   Shaun Fada speaks from the crowd.

SHAUN FADA_ They won't go, no fear of it. Don't you see
       them yourself as lazy as any cripple from here to
       Belfast ?

A voice Listen to Shaun Fada. He's so lazy nan

   Another young man, Padrig O'Dala, speaks from the
crowd.

PADRIG O'DALA      Did you hear of any curragh to be going
       in for it?

THE KING Indeed there are--a curragh from the Cooas,
       one from Ballymore and another from Leitriuch.

   The people press round the King        again,  talking and
quarrelling, and heis lost to sight.      paths,  their voices

   Children run away, up the village
high, we hear:

CHILDREN'S voices. Are you going to the races?    Iam now.

      Are you going, Padrig?

Close, we see Maurice and Tomas and Mauraid.

Tomas There'll be racing and dancing and games, all day
      long, and oh, the crowds!

MAURICE Let's Coke:

tomas  Oh, the devil, let's go...

                                      46
      They turn from the quay and begin to climb up towards
  the village. Mauraid runs by their side.

  MAURAID Will you be after taking me too?
  Tomas A girl!

 MAURICE Stay at home with you, Mauraid. Let the men

         be. Girls with their kissing and silly ways...

     And Maurice and Tomas run on up the path...
     Now we see the boys and girls of the island all gathered
 in groups in the village, talking.
     Hens cluck and peck in the dirt.
     Maurice and Tomas approach the gathering from different
 ends of the village. They meet on the fringe of a group of
 boys.

 MAURICE (excited) What does your father say?
 TOMAS Arra, man, all J got was a clout on the back which

       threw me out on my mouth,
 MAURICE Itisthesame with me. We'Il creep out unknown,

       Be up with the chirp of the sparrow, so...

    Tomas winks.

MAURICE Let's be pretending we cannot go, and set up a
       wail.

   They join the group of boys near them. . .

A BOY Are you going to the races?
ToMAs Notme....I hada cuff on the head for the asking.
MAURICE Oh, sorrow, nor me. I was kicked out of the

      house like a football. It's a cruel world. Are you going
      yourself?

                                               47
ANOTHER BOY Iam, indeed.
tomas. Oh, the luck of you.

   And Maurice and Tomas go off, conspirators . .

Dissolve To:                  cottage.   Moonlight    through
                              still and  silent save  for the
   The interior of Maurice's
the window. The cottage is
ticking of the clock.

   We hear, very softly:

THE VOICE Tick tock, tick tock . . . believe me, my two
       eyes never closed. . . tick tock, tick tock . . . all the
      night awake in the moonlight I was waiting counting
      the tick tock of the clock...

   As the voice speaks, we TRACK UP slowly to Maurice's

bed at the far end of the room.
   Now the light of dawn comes through the window.

THE VOICE ... waiting for the dawn and the crying of the
       cock from Padrig's yard. . . . Then--up at a spring!

   We see Maurice jump out of bed and begin to dress. He
washes himself in a bowl of water, and cuts a bite of bread,
and as he quickly dresses and washes and eats we hear:

THE VOICE ...anegg would not be broken under my feet
       for the lightness of my tread for fear I might be heard
       on the floor...

   Then, stealthily, he opens the door and looks out at the
early morning sky and runs down the village as we hear:

                                            48
THE VOICE Oh, the morning then would have raised the
       dead from their graves--an edge of golden cloud over
       Mount Eagle from the sun that was climbing in the east,
       a calm on the sea, not a stain in the sky and the lark
       singing sweetly above my head. . .

   And now, in the wonderful morning, Maurice and Tomas
are running down the village path towards the quay.

   A voice calls to them,

A VOICE Goodbye! Goodbye!

   They stop for a moment and turn to look up to the top
of the path. Mauraid stands there, alone, waving.

   They wave back, and run on down to the quay.
   A curragh is afloat, three men in it, another man about
to climb in.

ToMas Hurry, hurry. ... There's Shaun Tigue and Shaun
       momas 7!

They rush up to the curragh.

MAURICE Shaun, will you take us?
SHAUN TIGUE Where are ye going?
TOMAS The races!
MAURICE The races!

Shaun Tigue beckons them to jump in.

   Now the curragh is moving through the water,       away
from the island.
                                                     which
   Now, from the curragh, we look back at the quay   other
is dotted with figures, and at the paths down which

D  49
figures are moving. . . . Now, from the curragh, we look

back at the island.
   Other curraghs are moving off from the island.
   Now the curragh is in mid bay, guillemots, razorbills

and petrels on the water, the four men stripped to their
shirts rowing hard. Maurice and Tomas sit huddled together.

ToMas' | was never on the sea so early cnet

MAURICE It's you're the old stay-a-bed, boy. The sea's
      been up and about all night. . .

tomas When I am a man, J shall always be riding on the
       sea. As soon as the dawn I'll be rowing and riding...

SHAUN TOMAS   When you are a man, you'll be tired of the
      sea...

Tomas Not me!

MAURICE Not me!...

   Shaun Tigue, in the bows, points to a big, white-breasted
bird floating down with the tide.

SHAUN TIGUE Do you see the loon?
MAURICE Wouldn't you think it was a young gannet now?

   Shamus Kate, an old man rowing in the middle, speaks
as he rows, without looking up.

SHAMUS KATE   That is a bird never stepped on dry land...
SHAUN TOMAS.  And where do they lay then, Shamus Kate?

SHAMUS KATE Out on the sea . . . out on the sea.  would

SHAUN TIGUE And wouldn't you say that the sea
       carry off the egg?
                                          50
  SHAMUS KATE On my oath it does not, for she lays it
         between her two thighs and she keeps it there till the
         chick is hatched.

 MAURICE Ibelieve you. . . . Oh, the strange things!

     Now the curragh is nearing the great cliff of the mainland.
 They all take off their shoes and draw their trousers above
 their knees, and leap out and draw the boat over the stones
 above high water.

     And Maurice and Tomas scramble into their shoes again,
 and are off, off up the cliff.

    They run up the cliff, and are Ole.
    Now they are walking towards the chapel in Bally-na-
 houn.
    They stop at the entrance to the chapel, and stand with
 many people there, but on the edge of the crowd.

 MAURICE What is this place?

TOMAS Bally-na-houn, and farther than this I've never
       been in all my life...

    He stares in wonder at the chapel.

Tomas Oh, isn't it a big house! How was it built at all?

    The people begin to go into the chapel, and Maurice and
Tomas follow.

   Inside the chapel, we see them, close, sitting in the last
  ew.
4 We hear, as a background, the voice of the priest.
   Tomas is staring around him. Suddenly he sees that a man
in the front of the chapel has turned his head and is looking
at him.

                                     51
Tomas (ina whisper) Oh, I'll be killed, my father is over
      there and he is looking at me.

   Maurice looks, and sees that another man has turned his
head towards them.

MAURICE (ina whisper) My father, too. And Pierce. Oh,
      they will kill us...

   And the two boys bow their heads.
   The voice of the priest rises.

Cut To:

   The outside of the chapel.
   Maurice and Tomas run out and away from the chapel.
And then the rest of the worshippers come out. Maurice's
father and Tomas's father look around them, but the boys
are gone. The fathers smile and walk off with the others.
   The boys are climbing the Hill of Classach. We see them,
in LONG sHOT, climbing quickly.
   Now they are on top of the hill. And, close to them now,
we look down with them at the parish of Ventry.

Tomas (in astonishment) Oh, Maurice!

   And we see south over Ventry parish, and Maurhan
parish, and north to Kill parish, green, flowered fields on
all sides, a lonely house here and there away at the foot of
the mountain, Ventry harbour lying south-east, three or
four sailing-boats at anchor and a few curraghs beetling

across the water.

Tomas Isn't Ireland wide and spacious now?                       I remember
MAURICE Oh, she is bigger than al] this.

       Dingle where I was long ago.

                                                            [yp
TOMAS Where is that?

MAURICE (pointing) To the south of Mount Eagle . . .
Tomas -- Lord, I always thought there was nothing in Ireland,

       only the Blasket, and Dunquin, and Iveragh. . . . Oh,
       Maurice, it' is a grand day we will have . . .

   And at those words Tomas runs, goat-leaping, down the
hill, towards Ventry parish, and Maurice runs after him.

   They are walking through Ventry village. Many people
are abroad, in their holiday best. Tomas eyes them with
admiration.

MAURICE Och, fine as paycocks, look at them   strutting.
      The dandy men.

Tomas They must be millionaires, surely.

   And the two boys walk on up the street, gazing every-
where with pride and wonder, until they reach a shop.
They stop and look into the window. Over their shoulders
we see the goods in the window: boots, cloth, tobacco,
caps, groceries, tarred rope, apples and sweets.

MAURICE `There's toffee apples . . .
Tomas ...and hard gums, and gobstoppers, and rock . . .
MAURICE Oh, if we had money now...
TomMAs Don't mind that . . . isn't it our brothers and

       sisters will be giving us the pennies?
MAURICE Maybe...

   They turn from the window, and sit on the ledge, facing
the village street.

tomas And what's more, when my                father is drunk,
      believe me, it is easy to get money     out of him.

                                          53
   They sit for a moment in silence. Visitors to the races
pass them up and down the street. A young man with big
shiny boots, tightly fitting trousers, a hard hat, a buttonhole,
and a girl on his arm, passes by.

Tomas Who would that gay one be, I wonder  . . .?
MAURICE Maybe he is the mayor...
tomas The devil, they are coming!

   Along the street towards them come Maurice's father
and his brother Shaun and his sister Maura and Tomas's
father .

MAURICE (in a whisper)  Let on we are perished with the
      hunger .

   And the two boys bend their heads as the others reach
them.

MAURA Musha, look where the two changelings are. . .
SHAUN And how did you come to be here now. . .?
MAURICE'S FATHER It's no good talking. They would do

       anything they liked...

   He puts a ten-shilling note in Maurice's hand and a
crown in Tomas's.

TOMAS'S FATHER Don't you know that youth does be gay?

   He puts a ten-shilling note in Tomas's hand and a crown
in Maurice's.

MAURICE'S FATHER      Off with ye now and spend the day as
       ye please si,             54
   And, laughing and smiling, the fathers and sister and
brothers go off up the street, and Maurice and Tomas rush
into the shop...

Cut To:  ;

   Ventry strand.

   There is a great crowd on the strand, and a great noise
of hucksters shouting their wares and fair-men shouting
their games and people laughing and bargaining and children
being children.

   The two boys stand and watch the crowd in amazement.
A hurdy-gurdy is playing.

MAURICE Did you ever see such a crowd?
tomas' Oh, Lord, where will food be found for them all?

    They walk along the strand, past a hoop-la stall; and a
 little hand-worked roundabout and a man with rings and a
 stick to throw them on; and a cripple with a banjo, singing
 `Danny Boy' through the noise of the invisible hurdy-gurdy;
and a loud solitary man performing card tricks to an
audience of half a dozen small children and an ass: he is
shouting, `Hallo, hallo, hallo! Come on, ladies and gentle-
men: someone for the lucky club! Hallo, hallo, hallo!' A
little farther along the strand is gathered a big bulk of
people. Their laughter reaches the boys, and they run
towards the crowd, towards the roaring wall of backs, and
squeeze in to the front.

   With them we see, in a cleared space on the sands before
the crowd, a barrel and a man tucked inside it.

   People are throwing blocks of wood at the barrel, trying
to hit him. But they all miss, and after every shot the man
sticks his head up and puts out his tongue.

                                             55
   And the man with the wooden blocks, near the barrel,
is shouting:

THE MAN Hurray, hurray, here is Sammy-in-the-Barrel
      willing to keep his head for any man. Three chances
      for a penny. Come on! Come on, lads! Come on,
      kill him, boys!

   And Sammy-in-the-Barrel puts out his head and roars.
   And Maurice nudges Tomas, and Tomas nudges Maurice,
and at last Maurice goes timidly out from the front of the
crowd and buys three blocks.
   Now, from behind him, we see Maurice take a shot. An
old man with flowers in his hat stands, encouraging, by his
side.

OLD MAN A great shot, my love . .

   The block hits the edge of the barrel. And before Sammy
has had time to put out his head, Maurice aims again. And
up Sammy bobs to take it straight on the nose. He lets out
a great howl.

   The old man dances with delight, crying: `Musha, my
love for your hand for ever.' And the crowd shout. And
Sammy drags himself out of the barrel, howling and cursing.

   And Tomas rushes from the crowd and grabs Maurice
and they both run off down the strand, behind them the
noise of the crowd's laughter and Sammy's howling and
the old man calling and the music of the hurdy-gurdy and
the hoarse shouts of the card-man and `Danny Boy', fading.

   The boys run on over the strand. Suddenly they see four
curraghs drawn up in line in the bay, the men stripped and
their oars stretched forward.

   Now, from behind them, we see them face on, jumping

                                                   £6
in the air, till they are on the edge of the strand. The strand
is thickly lined with people, clattering, clamouring, dis-
puting, praising, disparaging, like a swarm of bees buzzing
on a fine day of harvest.

   Now we are close to Maurice and Tomas; they sit on their
heels on the rock; across them, across their hair wild in the
wind and their sparkling eyes and their whistling lips, we
see the four curraghs and the crews, bare to the waists,

tensed ready; and we hear, scattered among the voices of
the crowd, coming out clear for a moment then drowned
again, blown away by the wind or the sea-din, these

separate voices:

voices A barrel on Ballymore .                     world?
        Cooas Cooas Cooas ...
       My love for Ballydavid . . .
       Leitriuch, Leitriuch .. .
       whiz by like lightning . . .
       Och, the killing of the cattle on you. . .
       you are standing on my daughter .
       Cooas Cooas...
       A gallon for every baby in Ballymore...
       Bailydavid . . .

tomas Oh, Lord, now which is which in the
      Who shall we shout for? .. .

A voice shouts loud behind them.

voice Shout for Cooas.. .

   And, back now from Maurice and Tomas, we see that
the voice belongs to an old man standing on a rock just
behind them. He is a fat, tipsy old man, a bottle jutting

                                          ne
from his pocket, with his tall hat tied on to his head by

string OSE

   Maurice wriggles round on his heels to the old man. He
shouts through the noise.

MAURICE Which curragh is Cooas?                                           there . .
orp MAN Oh, the devil take you, it's that one

       and Tigue Dermod in the middle of it...

   The old man waves wildly, and we see the first curragh
with a man as tall as a giant in the middle .. .

   And we PAN from the first curragh along the other three
as the voice of the old man continues shouting through the
shouts of the crowd.

THE OLD MAN'S voice And that's Ballydavid. And that's
       Leitriuch. And that's Ballymore.

Now we see the four curraghs.
A gunshot.
The curraghs race through the water.
We hear:

THE OLD MAN'S VOICE Boo, boo, boo!

   And we cut to the old man to see him dancing drunkenly
on his rock, trying to pull off his hat, but the strings will
not allow it.

THE OLD MAN Pull Tigue, Tigue, Tigue . . .

cuT TO the Cooas curragh, The noise of the crowd rises.
cuT TO the four curraghs racing.

MAURICE'S AND TOMAS'S VOICES'                           Pull Tigue sites

                                                    58
   CUT TO Maurice and Tomas, shouting, squatting on their
heels, pulling at the wind as if they themselves were racing.

MAURICE AND TOMAS Tigue, Tigue, Tigue .. .

cuT TO the Cooas curragh.

THE OLD MAN'S voIcE        Remember  your ancestors!
       WOGAS, Cooas. . -

   CUT TO the old man staggering on his rock as he shouts
and dances and thrusts black tobacco into his mouth and
shouts through the tobacco with the juice running down
his chin .. .

   And the boys' voices take the cry of `Cooas Cooas' as
we CUT TO:

   The four curraghs, the Cooas curragh leading . . .

THE OLD MAN'S VOICE Bravo, Tigue. Bravo, bravo...

   CUT TO the old man. Waving and shouting and chewing
he slips off the rock and is up to his knees in the water. . .

   cuT TO the Cooas curragh pulling farther and farther from
the other three.

THE OLD MAN'S VOICE (above the noise of the crowd)
      My love, my love...

cuT To the old man wading deeper into the water.

THEOLDMAN Mylovetoyoufor ever, oh, flower of men...

   cuT TO Maurice and Tomas laughing and clapping . . .
   cuT To the Cooas curragh sweeping forwards. Tigue's
oars are lifted high to show they are the victors . . .
   cuT TO the old man, deep in the water crying.

                                                 59
THE OLD MAN- Oh, flower of men! Flower of men!

   And at last, with a great heave, he tears his hat off his
head and sends it skimming across the water.

   Now Maurice and Tomas run, with the whole running
crowd, towards the slip.

   Now the crowds are at the slip, but they do not stop.
They wade out into the sea to the curraghs, stretching out
their hands. The old man is leading them.

   From a curragh we see the crowd reach the Cooas crew
near us, and the old man, hatless, tears pouring from his
eyes, grasping the hands of Tigue Dermod and crying, up
to his waist in water:

THE OLD MAN Man beyond all men! Musha, love of my
      heart, my little jug...

   And other hands are grasping Tigue and the rest of the crew.
   Now from the slip we see the curragh, and all inside it,
lifted high on a hundred hands and borne towards us.
   And now the Cooas crew and the crowd throng from the
slip up towards the village. We see them approaching us,
the grand Tigue and the dripping-wet old man arm-in-arm
at the head of the procession.

Cut To:

   Maurice and Tomas, arm-in-arm too, like two small
victors, marching at the end of the procession.

   The procession moves into the public house.
   cuT To Maurice and Tomas entering the public house.
   From the door we look into the packed bar. In the middle
of the floor stands Tigue Dermod, a gallon pot in his hand.
The old man is handing gallons over from the bar to the

                                                 60
Cooas crew and their supporters laughing and crowding
around them.

   We move slowly into the bar, towards the counter and
the backs of drinking men. We move up to the backs of a
group of tall and burly men. And we see, between them,
little Maurice and little Tomas.

   Between the shoulders of the burly drinkers we see the
face of the barmaid smiling down at the two boys, whose

heads are only just above the counter.
   Now, from behind the counter, we see the heads of the

two boys, and hear:

MAURICE (in an unnaturally deep voice)  Two pints.
   The barmaid laughs.

THE BARMAID `Two pints? And have ye money?
MAURICE AND TOMAS' We have.

   The barmaid pushes two pints across to them. Maurice pays.
   From behind the counter still we see the faces of the two
boys very Close.

MAURICE (to Tomas, in a whisper) Maybe it will make

       us drunk.

ToMAs Not us.

MAURICE Did you ever drink before?

Tomas Arra, man, I did, that night they had the barrel in
       the house of Dermod O'Shea. I drank a pint and never
       got drunk.

   We see Maurice's hand come up with the pint pot. Then
his face is buried in it. We see only the heads of the two

                                                61
boys: Tomas looking at Maurice, and Maurice half hidden
behind his pint. Then the pint is lowered.

MAURICE It is good.

   Up comes Tomas's pint. Maurice looks on with interest.
Down comes the pint.

tomas. Oh, it has a foul taste, I will never drink it.
MaAuRICE I will tell you why you get a foul taste in it. It is

       because you are only sipping it. When you raise your
      glass to your mouth, make no stop till you have to draw
       breath.

   Both pint pots are now raised. We see only the two heads
half hidden behind the pots, and the fingers clutching the
handles. Down the pots come.

Tomas I think you are right. Let us have another.

   His hand brings down his pot with two bangs on the
counter.

   Now, from behind the counter, across the full and empty
pots and bottles, and through the crowd of drinkers against
the bar, we see the Cooas crew in the middle of the floor,
the old man among them. They all have gallon measures in
their hands. They are all drunk. The old man stands on his
toes and puts his hand on the muscles of Tigue's arm.
Tigue is drinking. The great arm is raised to hold the
gallon.

THE OLD MAN Musha, musha, isn't strength a fine thing!

   Tigue lowers his gallon, and opens his mighty mouth.

                                              62
TIGUE (in a high, hoarse, weak voice)    Up Cooas! Up
      Cooas!

And he drinks again.

THE OLD MAN Up Cooas! Up Cooas!

   Sea-water drips from his clothes.
   A hand stretches out from the crowd near him and takes
the old man by the hair.

THE OWNER OF THE HAND         What the devil is that talk.
       Ballymore. Ballymore.

   Closer now, we see Tigue slowly lower his gallon and
raise a great knotted fist.

TIGUE (to the owner of the hand, in his high weak voice)
      If I let down this sledgehammer you will be dead...

They all laugh es
The hand lets go of the old man's hair.

THE OLD MAN Cooas, Cooas...
   CUT TO Maurice and Tomas, seen from behind the counter.

Tomas I will fight him myselt ce
MAURICE I will hold your coat.

   And suddenly the laughter of the bar is blurred. We hear,
through the blurred laughter and the thick cries:

[HE VOICE A man will always remember the unpleasant
      things that do happen, and I remember that at that

                                      63
moment the house began to go round me like a
laughing top. . . . There were two Tomases where
there was only one before, and he reeling like a man
ina high Wane wx

   We see Tomas blurred and wavering, and hear Maurice's
voice.

MAURICE (inasmall voice) Something ails me, Tomas... .

   And the blurred laughter rises.
   Now, from the street outside, we see Maurice and Tomas
weaving out of the pub.

MAURICE Your face is green, Tomas Over Vaun.       of it
TOMAS Arra man, it is not, I could drink a barrel

          yet...

   And with these words Tomas falls against a wall. And
they both, their backs to us, lean over the wall. And looking
at the two boys leaning over the wall, we hear:

THE VOICE Isn't it great folly for any man to be drinking
      at all, I thought. And isn't it youth that's foolish. And
      this is the last time, indeed, I thought. And oh, dear,
       dear, dear...

Dissolve To:

   Maurice and Tomas walking on the road from the village
of Ventry, and away from us.

   The sun is sinking.
   Many people are taking the road also. They pass us, down
the road, into the sunset. The cripple with his banjo under

                             64
his arm; an old man pushing his hurdy-gurdy; children
silently sucking sweets, half sleeping as they walk, clutch-
ing their mothers' or fathers' hands; Sammy-in-the-Barrel,
with his barrel on his back; couples arm-in-arm ;two drunk
tinkers; a young man playing the melodeon as he goes,

Dissolve To:

   A curragh moving over the moonlit sea towards the
island.

   The music of the melodeon is heard in the distance, and
the voices of men far off.

   Closer now, we see that in the curragh are Maurice's
father and brother and sister, and Tomas's father and
brother, and Maurice and Tomas in the stern.

   And Tomas's brother is singing `Skellig's Boy', fine and
slowly and softly.

   We are close now to the stern.

MAURICE (softly, lazily half asleep) Oh, what a day! I

       never thought there was such a day to be had in all
      the world! Oh, the games and the singing and the
      shouting and the racing. . .

Tomas is eating a stick of rock.

Tomas I'm thinking that sweets are nicer than porter,
       Maurice...

MAURICE (very softly) Sucha day...

   Now in Lon sHot, the curragh is moving through moon-
light near to the island.

And from the distant, unseen mainland, we hear a crying

and an echoing of:

E                   65
       `Cooas Cooas
       Ho-lee-ho-hup-
      Ho-lee-ho-hup',

a crying and an echoing, and then a fading of all sound.

Fade Out:

Fade In:                                            move

   On the island village. Bright morning light. We
along the village, slowly. As we move, we hear:

THE voice Every day was a fine, grand day, sun or rain,
      for a growing boy on the sweet wild island, I thought
      then and J think still. . . . Going to school in the
      mornings, I would wish my neighbours the good day
      as they were working or setting about their work or
      sitting in the sun...

   We are moving along the village slowly: the village awake
and at work.

   At a cottage door sits, on a sugan chair, the Puncan of the
village. His arms are folded, he is chewing tobacco.

MAURICE'S VOICE Good morning to ye, Puncan.

The Puncan spits.

THE PUNCAN Faith, I have seen better...

   We move on.
   Outside a cottage Shaun Teague and Shaun Tomas are
setting out their nets in the sun.

                                                   66
 MAURICE'S VOICE Good morning, Shaun Teague and Shaun
        Tomas. How will be the mackerel tonight?

     They go on setting the nets.

 SHAUN TEAGUE Och, there'll be plenty, with all the

        gannets about, there was never such a day for them...

     We move on. Outside a cottage two women are washing
 clothes in a tub.

 MAURICE'S VOICE Good morning to ye, Kate O'Shea and
       Kate Joseph... .

    They go on washing.

 KATE O'SHEA Good morning to ye, Maurice. (To Kate
        Joseph) Did you ever see such a shirt in all your life?
        . . - I'm thinking all the dogs in the island have been
       after chewing the tail . . .

    We move on, the words trailing after us. Outside a
cottage Padrig O'Dala and Tomas's father and Paddy Tim
are mending their lobster pots.ca-.

MAURICE'S VOICE Good morning to ye.
TOMAS'S FATHER `Tell Tomas not to be forgetting the turf

       after school now...

   We move on. Outside a cottage, Mauraid is scattering
food for the chickens which cluck and peck all around her...

MAURICE'S VOICE Good morning, Mauraid. . .

   She looks up and smiles.

                                  67
MAURAID (shyly) Good morning to ye, Maurice. . . . Will
      you be on the cliff tonight to see the fishing?

We move on.

MAURICE  Arra, I will.
MAURAID  Shall I look at the fishing with you, Maurice?

   We move on, her words trailing after us, on along the
clustered village with its men working at pots and nets,
sharpening tools, cutting wood, and a clatter of pots and
pans and the sound of women's voices coming out of the

open cottages . .

THE VOICE Or on days when there was no school, maybe
      I would be lying with my daddo, stretched out on the
      turf, gazing down at the fish-filled sea . .

   And as the voice speaks, the picture DissoLvEs to the
cliffs, and we PAN along the cliffs to where the figures of
Maurice and the grandfather are lying. Closer to them, we
see that the grandfather's eyes are closed in sleep. Maurice
is lying on his belly, looking out to sea. It is afternoon.

MAURICE Do you know where I am looking, Daddo? I am
      looking at America. Oh, it is a fine place surely, all
      its chimneys touching the sky and everybody rich as
      captains. . . . Do you think that I will ever be going to
      America when I am a young man, Daddo?

The grandfather does not answer.

MAURICE Daddo, Daddo...

   Maurice turns around and looks at the old man sleeping,
and we hear:

                                             68
THE VOICE I remember thinking, looking down at the face
       of the old man asleep . . .

MAURICE'S VOICE You were one day in the flower of
      youth, but, my sorrow, the skin of your brow is
       wrinkled now and the hair on your head is grey. You
       are without suppleness in your limbs and without
       pleasure in the grand view to be seen from this hill.
      But, alas, ifIlive, some day I will be as youare now...

   As Maurice gazes at the old man asleep, and as we hear
his voice, his lips do not move.

   Now Maurice puts out his hand and gently pulls the old
man's beard. The old man opens his eyes.

THE GRANDFATHER    Oh, Mirrisheen, I fell asleep. Am |
      long in it?

MAURICE Not long at all.

THE GRANDFATHER And were you speaking to me in my
       sleep? I seem to have heard your voice, a long way
      away...

MAURICE I was letting on I could see America across the
       water but all I could see were the waves and the old
      gulls. . . . Shall I ever be going to America, Daddo?

THE GRANDFATHER Upon my word, it is likely. The young
      are ever after going away over the water, and they
      leave the old country cold and poor as a house without
       children...

MAURICE Then I shall stay on the island then, and be a
      fine fisherman .. .

THE GRANDFATHER Musha, my heart, a man of the sea
       never had a good life and never will . . .
                                        69
MAURICE Och, where I shall go then?

THE GRANDFATHER I don't know what way you will go
       but only to follow your nose in the end of all.

   And as he speaks the grandfather is filling and lighting
his pipe. And when it is alight Maurice takes out of his own
pocket a blackened clay and lights it, bowl to bowl, from
the grandfather's pipe. He draws the smoke down deep,
and the old man smiles. They lie together, over the noisy
sea, smoking and smiling. . .

Dissolve To:
   The sea. It is evening.
   A bird is flying over the sea.
   A bird is flying over many, many curraghs out on the sea.
   A bird is flying over the cliffs of the island.
   We PAN DOWN on to the cliffs above the strand.
   All the women of the village are sitting on their haunches

on the edge of the cliff, looking out at the curraghs.
   Behind them along the cliff stand old men and children,

Maurice and the grandfather and Tomas among them. And
we hear:

THE voice And on a night of mackerel fishing I would
       stand among the children and the old men of the
       village on the cliff over the strand, looking out at the
       curraghs and hearing the women calling and crying
       across the water to their men...

   Close now to the women on their haunches, we hear:

ONE WOMAN Your soul to the devil, throw the head of
      your net behind them...

                                                               JO
   She is waving her arms, her hair is streaming in the
WANG. a

KATE O'SHEA (screaming) Tigue, Tigue, draw in your
      nets. . . . Och, my pity to be married to you, you
      good-for-nothing . . .

ANOTHER WOMAN My love for ever, Dermod.. .

KATE O'SHEA Pull to the south with you. . . aie, aie...

A voice comes back across the water from the curraghs.

A VOICE May the yellow devil fly away with you...

ANOTHER WOMAN Over there! Over there! Patrick, are
      you stone blind. . .?

   And all the women are calling and crying, Kate O'Shea
screaming in Irish at the top of her lungs. Their shawls are
thrown off, they are flailing the wind with their arms.

   Now close to a group of old men near the roaring women,
we hear:

FIRST OLD MAN (groaning) Ooooh...

SECOND OLD MAN Arra, what ails thee?

FIRST OLD MAN' What ails me is a pain in my head listening
       to those seal-cows of women. . .

THIRD OLD MAN (pointing to Kate O'Shea)            Kate is giving

        out.

And Kate is now only croaking curses...

SECOND OLD MAN | The devil a wonder         short  of her  having
       a throat of iron. .
                                        71
FIRST OLD MAN She can croak louder than a bull-seal can
      bellow. . . . Och, to be married to a thunderclap . . ,

But all the noise of the women is suddenly hushed.
We are close now to Maurice and the grandfather.

THE GRANDFATHER   Look boy, your father is drawing in
      his net...

   And now, on the water, we see Maurice's father in his
curragh drawing up the heavy net, every mesh with a fish

in it.

   The air is loud with the roaring of the sea and the splash-
ing and thrashing of the mackerel and the creak of the
curraghs, and through all the noise we hear the voices from
the clifftop, close at our ears:

FIRST OLD MAN Musha, it is straight down with fish . . .
SECOND OLD MAN O Lord, O Lord, I doubt he won't

      land all he had...

THIRD OLD MAN _Lookat him now, he is cutting the net...

   And, from close on the water, we see Maurice's father
cutting his nets.

FIRST OLD MAN Och, the lucky man who gets the cut piece
      of the net, it is all his. . .

And now there is a commotion among the curraghs MPa
They all begin rushing up to get the cut piece of the net.

SECOND OLD MAN Lord, Lord, how many mackerel are
      there then in the sea?

THIRD OLD MAN     Praise to God for His gifts Ae
                                72
    Now the cut piece of the net is drawn up into a curragh.
    Now the curragh of Maurice's father is moving across the
shining sea.
    Now, from the water, close to the cliff, we look up at the
women on the edge: a long line of women, squatting on
their haunches, shawls over their heads, silent, utterly
unmoving against the darkening sky.
    And we hear, softly, a woman's voice, the voice of Kate
O'Shea:

KATE O'SHEA Praise to God for His gifts.

Dissolve To:

    The interior of Maurice's cottage. Close, we see a table
piled with apples and oranges and sweets and cakes and tarts,
and we hear voices and the laughter of young girls, and the
noise of the wind outside.

   We TRACK back to see the whole room; the lamps alight,
a great peat fire burning, the ticking clock.

   Maurice's sisters, Maura and Eileen, are busy at the hearth
and over the pots on the fire. Mauraid is scattering white
sand on the floor. Other girls are washing plates and setting
knives and forks on the table. And we hear:

THE VOICE Praise to God for His gifts,
      for a roof and a fire,
      a red red fire in the cold winter night
      in a house on the edge of the seas.
      And the wind be wild and the house do be bright...
      and the girls do be as busy as bees .
      Winter had come to the island, and Halloween was
      upon us, and outside in the blowing dark the boys were
      hunting thrushes.

                                          73
   And we are outside the house now, on the wild island:
the island thrown up black against the phosphorous sea.

   We see the bobbing pinpoints of lanterns on the stormy
cliffs.

   Now we are closer to the cliffs. Three lanterns bob
towards us, and then stop. In their light we see the faces
of Maurice and Tomas and a youth, Padrig Peg. . .

   Padrig lifts his hand out of his oilskin pocket.
   We see the hand close, in the lantern light. It is full of
dead thrushes.

PADRIG Six.

   Tomas puts out his hand.

TOMAS' Three here.

   Maurice puts out his hand.

MAURICE One. I had my hands around two more but they
       pecked me like puffins.

   A bird's cry--giog-giog-giog--comes out of the darkness.

MAURICE (whispering) What is that?

PADRIG It is a peewit. . . . It's blinded in the light. ar.
       What did you think it was .. .?

   Padrig thrusts his hand into a sparse and wind-blown bush
and pulls out the bird still crying. The crying stops.

PADRIG Now we will go down Seal Cove. . . . Quiet!
       Dead quiet! Take it fine and easy. Don't be afraid.

Cut:
   Now we see, from the cliff edge, the three lanterns
                                             74
 bobbing down the cliff. The noise of the sea shouts up to us.
 Blackness, and the three lights bobbing. Blackness, and the
 hollow shouting of the sea.

 Cut:

     Now we are close to the three boys standing in the cove.
 They move their lanterns slowly in half-circles, illuminating
 the great rocks and the sea breaking upon them, and we
 hear:

 THE voice (softly) You would think the living and the
        dead were there with the roar of the waves and the
        hiss of foam .

 PADRIG Don't be afraid. And don't speak a word till we
        get across to the patch of soil there. The thrushes are
        all sleeping NOW coe:

    Now we see the lanterns bobbing across the cove, and
across the crevice and the patch of soil.

    Close, we see Padrig thrust his hand into the crevice and
draw out a thrush. And again. And again. And again. As he
is capturing the sleeping birds, so Maurice and Tomas,
moving their lanterns to light the battering sea, speak
fearfully:

ToMas Are you afraid at all?
MAURICE The devil a bit...

Tomas It's often my father told me that people had been
       heard speaking here. .

MAURICE Oh, whisht, Tomas, do not say that. . . .
Tomas But they were not people indeed.
MAURICE Faith, it is I know they were not... .

                                             IPS
   Now from another part of the cove we see the wavering
lanterns, we see mighty waves roaring in and crashing on
the rocks.

   Now the three lanterns' lights move up the cliff.
   Now from the edge of the cliff we look down on to the
three lights climbing up towards us. They come closer. We
see, in the lantern light, the three boys scrambling up and
clinging on to one another's coat tails.
   Now the light is blindingly near us.
   And now we are back in the bright cottage, at the end of
the room farthest from the door. It is full of boys and girls.
The girls are beginning to pluck the sparrows heaped on a
table.
   The door is flung open. The wind hurling in, and then
Maurice and Tomas and Padrig, spindrift-wet and wild-
haired.
   There is a noise in the house, of the voices of children
merry together, and a boy calls out, and his cry is taken
up by other voices, as the three enter.

A BOY How many have you?

ANOTHER BOY How many now . .?
ANOTHER BOY Oh, look at them all...

A BOY Igot twenty...
PADRIG Faith, we have twenty-eight . . .

    The three throw their thrushes on to a table...

Cut To:

    The thrushes roasting on the fire. We hear the music of a
melodeon.

    PAN ALONG the room slowly from the fire.

                                                     76
     A young man is sitting on the floor, back against the wall,
 playing the melodeon. .

     Four girls and four boys are dancing a set, which is a
 dance like the old quadrille.

     Boys and girls are sitting at the table, eating. Some stand,
 eating the little roasted birds with their fingers, watching
 the dancing.

    A girl is sitting on a boy's knee.
    Boys are leaping up at a big apple hung by a rope from the
 rafters, trying to take bites out of it.
    Now we are close to a tub of water and a little group of
 boys and girls, Mauraid and Maurice among them, kneeling
 around it.
    A boy and a girl, at the same time, throw a bean each
 into the water.

 MAURAID (softly, looking at Maurice) If the beans sink

        in the water, it is a sign that Michael and Brigid do
       love one another. . .

THE GIRL BRIGID Och, they are floating. . . .

    Mauraid puts a bean in Maurice's hand.

MAURAID Will you try?

    Maurice throws the bean into the water, and, as he does
so, Mauraid throws one in also. ©

    We see the beans sink in the water. ...
   Now we see close the faces of Mauraid and Maurice.
   And now nearly all the boys and girls are dancing. The
melodeon is playing a gay tune. Maurice is dancing with
Mauraid . . . the music rises.

Fade Out:

                                                 77
Fade In:

   On the sea.
   The sea is violent.
   The sea is still.
   The sea breaks against the rocks.
   The sea laps the rocks.
   A bird is flying over the rough sea.
   A bird is flying over the calm sea.
   A bird is flying over the sea.
   A bird is flying over a single curragh on the sea.
   And through this we hear:

THE VoIcE  The life of a boy a-growing
           on the little island

           was a great coming and going;
           sea loud or silent
           as a flock of snowing--
           a great coming and going
           of the weathers and the birds
           and the seasons and the tides
           and the singing of the Irish words
           and the love of the world besides . . .

   And behind the words of the voice, and through the
changing voices of the wind and the sea, we hear the same
words very softly spoken in Irish.

   And now we are close to the curragh, and Maurice and
Padrig Peg and the grandfather are sitting and rowing there.

THE voice Fishing for mackerel or herring
       in the Great Sound
       or out after pollock on the Wild Bank
      where the cries of a million birds were falling--

                                                  78
riding the wild waves in a Samhain wind

or turning in spring time
to the island of Inish Vickallaun--

There was so much to be done
under the moon and the sun
I cared for nothin
save the island people and the island ways
and the great passing of the days

to the sounding of the waves...

   Through the words of the voice we see the curragh in the
Great Sound, and on the Wild Bank; we see the nets raised,
empty and full; we see the curragh moving on choppy and
on glassy water.

   Now we are close to the curragh again, Maurice and
Padrig and the grandfather there with dogs at their feet.

THE GRANDFATHER        Do you see the house on the Inish
        now?

The grandfather points out to the Inish Island.

MAURICE I do not.      Look carefully at the middle   of the
                       will see the sun sparkling on  some-
THE GRANDFATHER
       island and you
       thing. Cass

   From the curragh, we see the house high on the Inish,
caught in the sun.

PADRIG It was there I was born, but only the birds and
       the beasts do live there now.

THE GRANDFATHER It was once a fine place; now the
       weeds grow over the paths and all the houses but the
       one are fallen in the wind and the rain.

                                                    WS,
   Now the curragh is closer to the Inish.

MAURICE Oh, listen, listen.

   And we hear from the Inish a noise which takes an echo
out of the coves. Gurla-gu-hu-hu-golagon! Gurla-gu-hu-hu-
golagon!

THE GRANDFATHER (smiling) Have I not told you often

       that spirits are to be seen and fairy music to be heard
       above in the Inish?
MAURICE What is it, Daddo?
THE GRANDFATHER Row oon, rowon...

   Again we hear the noise of Gurla-gu-hu-hu-golagon!
And its echo in the coves.

   Now the curragh is closer to the Inish.

PADRIG Look innow, and keep your eyes on the shingle . . .

   And we see, from the water, a great number of seals
stretched at full length, sunning themselves on the strand.

MAURICE'S VOICE Och, the seals are sleeping in the sun. . .
THE GRANDFATHER'S voice And do you think they are

       sleeping? Look, boy... .

   We hear the grandfather and Padrig give a great roar.
   The seals raise their heads.
   Then away with them to the water, at a wonderful
swiftness.

    They are spouting in the water.

   Now we are close to the strand; not a seal to be seen,
save only the rings they have left in their wake.

                                                80
   Now Maurice, the grandfather and Padrig are climbing
an old path up the Inish cliff.

   Now they are within sight of the house at the foot of a
little hill.

   The dogs are barking and chasing in and out of the ferns,
the tall grass and the bracken. We see rabbits running.

   Now we are near the house: a little low hut with a felt
roof, ruins in plenty around, weeds and nettles growing
among them. The dogs, each with a rabbit in his mouth,
run up to the two men and the boy, who take the rabbits
away from them.

   The men and the boy stand alone on the island in the

setting sun.

THE GRANDFATHER  `The house of Shaun O'Carna stood
       there.

   We see a few pieces of rotten wood in the deep and
tangled grass.

   And we PAN along the nettled and weedy wilderness... .

PADRIG'S VOICE Here my father was born and his father
       before him--there was the schoolroom there--here
       were the fine paths where we climbed up to the sheep
      on the hills--there was singing and dancing and great
      story-telling in all the fine stone houses--nothing now,
      nothing, nothing . . .

CUT BACK to the three.

THE GRANDFATHER My sorrow, the day will come when the

Blasket is empty too and the houses in ruin and nothing
to be seen but the green grass.

MAURICE Faith, never, Daddo.

F                       81
THE GRANDFATHER The young will be going away from
      the island, as they went away from this place--over
       the sea to America, into the towns and the cities .. .

   The sun is setting behind the Foze Rocks, and nothing to
be seen beyond them but the sky like a great shining wall.

   Now the three are moving up the little hill, the grand-
father's voice continuing.

GRANDFATHER'S VOICE... the young will go and the old
       will be left. And after the old are dead and are on the
       way to truth, there will be no more fishing nor hunting
       nor fowling on the island and all will be ruin...

   We are in the churchyard half way through the grand-
father's words, by the old chapel. The two men and the boy
are standing in the middle of the churchyard. Above the
ruin is a cross.

THE GRANDFATHER (softly) Maybe it will come that all
       the little islands, all the little places where men do

       make a livelihood together out of the gathering of the
       strand and the hunt of the hill and the fish of the sea
       will be empty and forgotten . .

MAURICE I shall stay on the island . . .

THE GRANDFATHER (smiling) You will be most lonely,

       for you will be the only one. . . . Come now, let us
       go down to the little house. . . .

    And they move away out of the darkening churchyard.

Dissolve To:

    The entrance of the Inish house. The grandfather opens
 the door. Maurice peers past him into the room. We see

                                                        82
  the room from Maurice's angle. The walls are whitened
  with flaking lime. A rabbit scampers out of the room through
 a hole in the wall.

     Now, from the end of the room opposite the door we see
 the grandfather enter, followed by Maurice and Padrig.

     The grandfather crosses to the hearth, his arms full of
 ferns. He kneels and begins to make a fire of the ferns, saying
 over his shoulder:

 THE GRANDFATHER You be going out and laying traps for
        the morning, Padrig. Maurice, open two of the rabbits
         now and hang the other two outside the house. . .

     He lights the fern.
     CUT TO Padrig sweeping the floor of the room with a
 brush of ferns.
    cut TO Maurice skinning the rabbits with his knife.
    CUT TO two rabbits hung on a nail outside the window in
 the deepening darkness.
    cuT To the grandfather, Maurice and Padrig sitting, the
old man in a broken chair, the others on fern-heaps on the
floor, near the fire, eating from a steaming pot. A lantern
is lit. Moonlight streams through the window on to the
fire and the seated figures. We hear the noises of the wind
and the sea.
    They have finished eating. The two men light their pipes.

MAURICE _I think I can hear the seals. Olagon olagon.

   And we hear, through wind and sea, the far noise of the
seals,

MAURICE I wonder, Daddo, would you believe that the
       seals are people put under magic?
                                     83
   He looks up at the old man, his face white in the moon-
light.

papric I have heard it, and upon my word I would believe
       it, for they are just like old women keening.

THE GRANDFATHER Some years ago there was a man went
       from the Blasket hunting the seals, about the month
       of November, because the young seals were born. It
      was back in Bird Cove it happened... .

   In moonlight and firelight Padrig and Maurice on the
ferns stare up at the old man speaking, his pipe a-glowing.

THE GRANDFATHER When he came out of the boat he saw
       a young seal up in the head of the cove. He went up
       after it, stick in hand, as was the custom when they
       went seal-hunting. .. .

MAURICE (in a whisper) Yes, yes...
THE GRANDFATHER And the cow-seal leapt straight at him,

       snarling. But he clambered up on the ledge on the side
       of the cove, and when he had reached it, would you
       believe it, the cow-seal spoke out to him. `If you are in
       luck', said she, `you will leave this cove in haste, for
       be it known to you that you will not easily kill my
       young son'; and she went back again to her young one.
       `For the sake of the world,' the man cried out to his
       mate in the boat, `back her in as quick as you can.'
       And they were off. And from that day till the day he
       died, that man never saw a day's health. . . .

MAURICE (softly) Faith, I believe it... .

    Now in the moonlit room--the fire and lantern out--

                           84
 the two men and the boy lie, each in a corner, on a bed of
 ferns. ...

     Close to Maurice, we see that he is not sleeping but that
 his eyes are wide open. . . . He is looking up at the moonlit
 night through the cobwebbed window.

    We look up at the night from Maurice's angle. The two
 rabbits hang on a nail outside, at the side of the window,
 moving slightly in the wind, half-dancing on air.

    We see a hand, an arm, pass across the window to the
 rabbits. The hand lifts the rabbits off the nail.

    Very close to Maurice, we see his eyes strained wide, his
mouth rounded. We hear his terrified whisper: `O Lord,
save me from the fairies.'

    As the hand, dangling the rabbits, slowly draws back
across the window and vanishes, Maurice screams.

    He leaps to his feet, runs over to Padrig, kicks him.
    Padrig turns in bed.

PADRIG (sleepily) What ails you?

MAURICE Oh, oh, Padrig, it is something I saw outside
       going off with the rabbits . . . a long hooking hand...

PADRIG Musha, my pity for your brass head. Go to
       sleeeen.. .-.

   He turns back to sleep.
   Maurice creeps to the corner where the Grandfather
lies.
   The grandfather is lying on his back, his hands folded
across his chest like those of a dead man, his lips smiling.
   And Maurice creeps back to his own corner and burrows
under the ferns and heaps them over his head until not an
inch of him can be seen.

                                      85
Dissolve To:

   The room, in the light of morning, seen through cobwebs:
through the cobwebbed window.

   Padrig is rising, rumpling his hair and stretching. He
goes across the room, through cobwebs, to the grand-
father's corner, bends down and taps him on the shoulder.

   Now we are inside the room.

PADRIG The bright day is here. Wake up, wake up,
       Grandfather O'Sullivan .

   The old man is immediately awake. He sits upright in
bed.

THE GRANDFATHER Good morning to ye, Padrig.

   He puts out his hand for his pipe and matches on the
floor near him.

   Now Maurice is coming up slowly out of his refuge of
ferns.

   Padrig moves away. We hear him whistling.
   The grandfather looks across to where Maurice's head
is visible among the ferns.

THE GRANDFATHER And what were the delusions that
      came on you last night, Mirrisheen?

MAURICE (in wonder) You were asleep, Can you hear
      what is said when you are sleeping?

THE GRANDFATHER Never better.

   Maurice scrambles out of the ferns, and         stands  brushing
them off him in the middle of the room.

   Still we hear Padrig's whistling.

                                               86
MAURICE Upon my word, they were no delusions at all,
       but I saw the long arm and the hand and I saw it take
       the rabbits off the nail... .

THE GRANDFATHER Don't you know that no one dead
       would take the rabbits?

   He is smoking happily now, a venerable old man sitting
on the floor, up to his waist in ferns.

MAURICE I don't know, but alive or dead he took them... .

THE GRANDFATHER  And what is the living man on this
       island?

The whistling, off, stops.

PADRIG'S VOICE Faith, Maurice, you were right.

   Now, from the end of the room, we see Padrig standin
at the open door, the bright morning and the wild fields
behind him, holding a tin in his hand.

PADRIG The rabbits are gone. A sailor must have come
      ashore and taken them, and look, what did he do but
       slip a tin of tobacco under the door, as is the custom
       with them. ...

MAURICE Why didn't the dogs be barking outside?

THE GRANDFATHER Dogs like sailors.

MauRICE But what would a living sailor be doing on the
       Inish in the middle of the night?

THE GRANDFATHER (in the voice of a man ending an argu-

       ment for once and for all) And what would a dead
       sailor be doing with tobacco. . . . We will set out
      now....

                                     87
   And he jumps up out of the ferns, nimble as a young

man. |; .
   Now, in LONG sHOT, we see the grandfather, Maurice

and Padrig walking through the thigh-deep grass of the
Inish.

   We hear the dogs barking.
   We see the three figures bending every now and then and
lifting up a rabbit and tying the rabbit on to the pole which
Padrig carries across his back. The pole is hung with rabbits
like dark, furry washing on a line.
   We see them on the edge of the cliff.
   One by one, they go over the edge of the cliff.
   Now there is nothing to be seen on Inish Vickallaun but
the wild fern and grass blowing and the birds flying and

crying over.

                                          88
             SYNOPSIS OF THE SECOND HALF OF

                 "TWENTY YEARS A-GROWING'

 Here follows a sequence of a wake on the island. In this
 sequence we see, for the first time, the grown-up people
 of the island all together drinking and story-telling. And we
 see the life of the island for the last time through a child's
 eyes (for in the next sequence Maurice has grown from
childhood to adolescence). We see and feel the fears of a
child at the coming and the appearance of death. His
imagination is stirred by the stories of his grandfather at the
wake: stories of strange deaths and strange risings, stories
as old as the island, as old as Ireland, as old as peasants. And
one of these stories we see enacted: a short half-dream
sequence to balance the first dream of the butterfly and
the skull.

   After the drinking and the story-telling, the singing and
the keening, we pissoxve to the coffin being carried through
the island and down the windy paths to the sea. And as we
see the coffin descending, we hear the voice of Maurice
O'Sullivan saying that a part of him, too, died that night:
a whole, deep part of his life: his childhood.

   Now we see a funeral procession of curraghs across the
water as we FADE OUT.

   We FADE INTO a fine and sparkling morning on the island.
As the CAMERA PANS along the island we hear Maurice's
voice saying: `Oh, it was a grand and lovely thing indeed,

                                        89
growing up by that old loud sea, growing from a child into
a youth... .' And the CAMERA reaches Maurice as a youth.
He is looking after sheep on the cliffside, the sun yellowing
in the west and a lark singing above. He sees lambs gam-
bolling together.

   And suddenly, over the brow of the cliff, appears a man.
His coming-up is similar, in feeling and unexpectedness,
to that of the King of the Island when Maurice first leaves
Dingle and comes home. And just as the appearance of the
King was the announcement to Maurice of a new and mar-
vellous life, a life old as the hills and without any doubts at
all, so the appearance of the man now announces the begin-
ning of doubt, introduces into the idyllic timelessness of the

island the first sound of the time-bound outer world and the
first suggestion of adult responsibility.

   The man is an Englishman. (In O'Sullivan's book he is

George Thompson, the translator of Twenty Years A-Growing.)
   The next sequence shows the growth of friendship

between Maurice and the Englishman. Maurice is showing
and explaining his own world; he is, in fact, putting forward
the ageless argument for the dignity and beauty of life in the
small peasant community. The Englishman is explaining his
own world: the world of the vast community: the modern

world: paradise of money and the clock. (It should be

mentioned here that the Englishman will not be made an
unsympathetic character: he is not the serpent in the garden
but the voice of the world beyond the Blasket horizon. He
is the voice that is heard in all man's growing up. "There is a
world beyond your own,' that voice has always said.)

    And now we see life on the island from Maurice's new
viewpoint. We see him trying to adjust his new ideas to the

peasant tradition. We see and hear the inevitable conflict:
shall he remain on the island, knowing that the life of small

                                                                  9°
peasant communities is noble and suffering, dignified and
poor, beautiful and bitter, or shall he go into the wide,
unknown world, forsaking his tradition?

   And we build his relationship with Mauraid, now a child
no longer but a young girl. And the conflict of ideas and the
love of boy and girl rise together to a climax. Through all
Maurice's adolescent life we are watching the departure of
youth from the island, discontent and emigration. And the
climax comes with Mauraid's decision to go to America
along with the rest; and her going.

   Now Maurice, of all the young people, of all those whom
we saw in the happy early sequence, is alone on the island.

   The Englishman appears again, to introduce the final
argument. His is the voice of the outer world, the voice and
the call, not necessarily of America but even of the outer
world of Ireland itself. This voice and call are strengthened,
in Maurice's mind, by his wish to join Mauraid. But against
this is his own conviction of the rightness and the goodness
of life on the island. And this conviction is expressed for
him, finally, by the grandfather; by the enduring figure,

the eternal peasant.
   And Maurice remains upon the island. He faces poverty,

privation, labour and loneliness; he faces a life without
Mauraid and without help; but he is sure.
       HIS beautiful, tender and imaginative
       film script by Dylan Thomas has only
 recently been discovered.
    `Here is the egg of a seabird--lovely, per-
 fect and laid this very morning.' So wrote
 E. M. Forster when Twenty Years A-Growing
 by the Irish writer, Maurice O'Sullivan,
 was first published in English in 1933 (it was
 originally written in Irish). It is upon this
 well-known autobiography that Dylan
Thomas based his unfinished film script
dealing with the first half of the book, and
in it he has preserved the freshness which
evoked Mr Forster's words.
   The script is fully characteristic of the
dramatist of Under Milk Wood (Dent, Twelfth
Impression), for here as in that notable `play

for voices' Thomas demonstrates his fine,
uncluttered sense of drama, combining the
poetic with a simple, profoundly moving
truth. The material he had to work on was

of considerable fascination, for it portrays

O'Sullivan's childhood on the lonely Blasket

Islands, which lie off the Kerry Coast in the
extreme south-west corner of Ireland. They

are now uninhabited except for occasional
summertime holiday-makers. The district is
still Irish-speaking.
